# indata25-final-project

## Final Project Reflection

For this project I utilized two data files downloaded from the Kent State University’s Google Analytics account. I followed the instructions given to me by a Kent State staff member to correctly filter out my center’s website data to get it ready for download. A much more in-depth discussion of this data sourcing and its quality is down below in the Milestone 1 reflection, but I will reiterate the main points. This is external data that I did not collect myself, and so I cannot be entirely certain in its quality. I am operating under two key assumptions: that Google Analytics correctly tracked, compiled, and formatted the data I needed; and that the Kent State staff member who created the general report template in Google Analytics for filtering to a specific website domain did so correctly. Unfortunately I don’t really have a way to verify that those assumptions are true, but the reality is that this is the only data for my center’s website that we have. It is either this data or nothing, and so this is the data I chose to use for my project and to answer my driving question. I did not experience any issues with this data and nothing jumped out as being weird during my analysis, so I do feel confident in the data quality. 

This project is very applicable to my future career in web development. Throughout my undergraduate education I have learned the technical and design knowledge and skills necessary for creating websites. However, I have never really performed a web analytics project like this before, and I have never used Google Analytics before. This has been a great experience for me to become familiar with Google Analytics, a very popular web analytics tool, and to go through the process of exploring web data to make conclusions on user engagement with a website. Now not only can I create and redesign websites themselves, but I can also evaluate websites based on their data to suggest improvements or answer other related questions. Recently I have been job searching, and a few web design/development postings I have seen also listed web analytics as a responsibility (one posting even named Google Analytics specifically), so this project has been very valuable to me in preparing me for my future career. I will definitely be adding this project to my resume.

My primary audience for this project included my supervisor at the LGBTQ+ Center, Ken Ditlevson, and I already showed him and the center’s Assistant Director, Meghan Schwind, my initial slideshow presentation. They both provided some feedback regarding minor changes, mainly related to language or grammar, and Ken was very happy with my final product. In the project proposal plan I also mentioned that other higher education administration professionals in the Division of Student Life may also look at my final deliverable for this project as well. As of this week, Ken specifically asked me if he could share my presentation with three other staff members within the Division of Student Life: his boss, the Associate Vice President of Belonging, Engagement, and Success; his boss’s boss, the Senior Vice President of Student Life; and the Director of Marketing & Communications. I have actually met all of these folks, and I know they are all busy people, so I stand by my point that my communication of this project needs to be simple, clear, and straightforward so they can understand what they need to without wasting their time on extra, unnecessary information. I definitely believe the flow of my presentation gives enough relevant context without being too much, and I believe the overview and filter/zoom data visualizations effectively communicate my main messages from the data without being confusing or overwhelming. In short, I think my data visualizations and final presentation are the right fit for my primary audience. 

Overall I have really enjoyed working on this project. I have learned a lot about web analytics and data visualization that will benefit me in my career. I have also been able to make one final important contribution to my job that will hopefully be used to keep our LGBTQ+ and ally students, faculty, and staff supported at Kent State during these challenging times. I am incredibly glad that my supervisor really liked my final product and I am very grateful to have had the opportunity to work on this project. 

~

## Final Project Milestone 3 Reflection

In my Final Project Plan Proposal, I stated this benchmark for Milestone 3: “All of my final visualizations are completed. They are functional, aesthetically pleasing and biologically relevant, and effectively communicate the intended messages of the data narrative. I am working on completing my final deliverable for the final project deadline (May 8th) but it may not be entirely ready at this milestone yet.”

I am very happy with what I was able to accomplish for Milestone 3 in reference to the goals I initially set for it, and I think the majority of the work for this project is done (but obviously not all of it). First, I polished and added some finishing touches to my two main data visualizations (barplot and scatterplot). I believe these visualizations are easy to understand (keeping in mind my audience of busy professionals) and that they effectively communicate two things: 1) the webpages of our website that are the most utilized (highest views and highest engagement), and 2) from those most utilized webpages, which ones I specifically am recommending to be preserved/migrated to a new website. 

I also created a draft presentation of my final deliverable using an outline I created in this milestone’s jupyter notebook (link to this presentation is at the end of the notebook). Within this draft presentation, I started to create the overview first, filter/zoom, and details on demand pieces of my data visualizations, keeping in mind that these are static images and not literal interactive graphs. The presentation is not finished (particularly the second half of the slides are mostly placeholder text or my thoughts on what content to put there), but I think this is a solid foundation on which to build the rest of my final deliverable. 

~

## Final Project Milestone 2 Reflection

In my Final Project Plan Proposal, I stated this benchmark for Milestone 2: “I have determined what narratives from the data that I want to tell and have a draft of preservation recommendations for my final deliverable. Based on these findings, the concepts for my final visualizations are determined and I have started creating them. These visualizations are on their way to being completely functional but may not be aesthetically pleasing yet.”

I ran out of time to do a whole lot of data visualization for this milestone, but overall I think I was able to meet most of what I outlined in my original Milestone 2 goal. First, I closely examined each URL in my 3 DataFrames to determine which of those URLs are actually valid, meaning they fit two criteria: 1) they are a URL that is actually within the LGBTQ+ Center website’s domain and not a different KSU domain/website and 2) the content associated with the URL actually makes sense to preserve and migrate to a different platform in the event the LGBTQ+ Center closes. Before I started I decided that if after this process I ended up with only a few URLs, then I would have to re-filter the DataFrames to include more URLs and I would go through the process again. Luckily, I was able to identify 9 valid URLs, 7 of which that I definitely want to recommend for preservation and migration, 1 of which I am rolling into my recommendation alongside one of the main 7, and 1 that I will display as a suggestion but with a disclaimer (this entire process is explained in the jupyter notebook itself). 

Additionally, I did some data visualization that explored some basic concepts for my final visualizations. Based on feedback from Milestone 1, I created two horizontal barplots, which I think works well for one of my DataFrames. For the second DataFrame, I wondered if a scatterplot might work better to show the relationship between two variables, so I created one and talked about some changes I believe I should make. I do think that both of these are simple and easy for my audience to understand. I would say my graphs are at the ugly stage, but I don’t think they’re bad, and more work needs to be done before they are on their way to good. I think that is what I will mainly be working on for Milestone 3.

~

## Final Project Milestone 1 Reflection

In my Final Project Plan Proposal, I stated this benchmark for Milestone 1: “I have loaded all data files into pandas DataFrames, began experimenting with different visualizations, and am making any necessary adjustments to the DataFrames (e.g., I need to create a new column in order to accurately portray a certain graph) so they will be ready to be used for the final visualizations.”

Overall, I believe I have met my goals for this milestone. I loaded in and explored each of my five data files to determine which are and are not relevant for answering my driving question and therefore which files I should continue pursuing with this project. Throughout this milestone I only used barplot visualizations because those were the most helpful for me while exploring my data, but I have not yet determined if those would be the best visualizations for my final deliverable, and so that is something I will explore further in my next milestone. In terms of any necessary adjustments to the DataFrames, I did apply filters to limit how many observations were included in each visualization, so I can choose to either keep using those filters in the future or store that filtered data in a new DataFrame and move forward with the new DataFrames. I can make that decision in the next milestone. All in all I am very happy with the progress I have made so far and I believe I have a much better understanding of my data and the direction I am going to take this project. 

One limitation with the data I have acquired is that these are metrics, and that means these numbers can tell us what users have been doing on our website, but it cannot tell us the why of their behavior. We really only have part of the story here, which is absolutely better than nothing because it still gives us something to work with and learn from, but I do recognize that a more complete picture (what + why) would provide us a better understanding of the value our website's content brings to our users.

When thinking about data quality, I am very aware that my data is from external sources that I am not familiar with. In regard to the one non-Google Analytics data file that was sent to me by the Executive Director of Digital Communications (the menu link usage file), in her email to me she said that data was from a “lookerstudio report.” I did not know what this meant, so I looked it up and Looker Studio seems to be a data visualization platform owned by Google. This is also a platform I am not familiar with, and so I am not sure where the data within this report came from, but maybe it came from Google Analytics itself since they are owned by the same company; maybe you can link the Looker Studio and Google Analytics accounts. So really I am not sure where the data in this file came from, but ultimately I decided not to use this data anyway because another data file of mine would better answer my driving question. While I am glad I thought through the sourcing of this data, its uncertain quality is not going to be a concern for the future of this project.

Because Kent State University's Google Analytics account is set up for the entirety of kent.edu, there is an existing report template that has already been structured and set up for filtering only data from individual departments' websites. The instructions provided to me said to make a copy of this report template and input into the filter my department's URL (/lgbtq) so only data from our website would be included in the report. I followed the rest of the steps and downloaded the four resulting data files so I could import them into python. Obviously with this process, I am putting my trust into the Kent State employee who set up the report template in the first place. I can see that this template was last modified September 26, 2024, so at least it has been reviewed recently and hopefully if there were any previously identified issues they were able to be fixed, but I would not know that information. I also have to trust that this report template is going to give me the data I need to answer my driving question for this project, as I am not familiar enough with Google Analytics to make changes to my report settings and try acquiring different metrics, nor do I have the time.

I also have to trust that Google Analytics itself has collected the metrics and given them to me as it is supposed to, and again without already being familiar with that process I don't know how I would check that. The LGBTQ+ Center has never done its own web analytics report and I am not aware of any other department doing a web analytics report for us specifically. I did not even know KSU was tracking analytics (though in hindsight it makes sense) and it never came up in my work with my center's website, so I am kind of chagrined that we haven't been looking at this sooner. I suppose it wasn't ever really a priority for our department; we do only have 2 full time staff members and no one within our department until me has really worked consistently on our own website. Unfortunately Google Analytics data only lasts 18 months (according to the instruction document given to me), so I can't even go back and download our data from previous years to compare each of those years with what I will be analyzing now. 

All that is to say, the data I have seems to be all there is to work with. The only other source of data I could think of that could be used to answer my driving question would be actually surveying real users of our website and just asking them what they use our website for and what content is valuable to them (this would be useful because we could also get insight into the "why" that content is valuable), but obviously that is beyond the scope of this class and there is not nearly enough time for that.

In regards to relating this project to my future career, Google Analytics is supposedly used by “millions of website and app owners” (according to their own website), and so it is possible that my future employer may expect me to use Google Analytics data to create reports to determine if our website goals have been achieved and any new goals we can begin to strive towards. Therefore, through this project I am becoming familiar with Google Analytics itself and the many kinds of metrics it tracks and how that data can be used to identify areas of success and improvements for a website. 

In regards to my primary audience, since I am not into the fine-tuning of the data visualization aspect of this project yet, I was not really thinking about my primary audience during my data exploration. However, reflecting on it now, my target audience (my supervisor and other higher education administrators) are busy people with many different things asking for their time and attention. Therefore, I think it makes sense for me to be very selective with my data, ensuring only the most relevant are included so that I can make my main arguments and recommendations without distracting from my main message with irrelevant information/graphics for data that does not help me achieve my goal. Basically, I don’t want to waste my audience’s time, and so I think only using two data files is okay because they contain the most relevant data for answering my driving question and addressing the specific topic of my project. 
